# Inference methods

TreePPL supports a continuously growing number of inference methods.
The user needs to select the inference method and options.
To get a complete list of the available methods and options the user can type `tpplc` on the command line, which will provide all supported command-line options.
One can define the schema by issuing a command-line compilation command, or by making the appropriate choices in Python or R.
Please find below a reference list of the supported strategies with an explanation.

## Importance Sampling

```bash
tpplc -m is-lw
```

This is a basic inference schema that should not be used for complex models.
It is useful for illustrating and understanding probabilistic programming.

## Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) Methods

TreePPL supports two SMC methods:

  - bootstrap particle filter (BPF), and
  - alive particle filter (APF).

Both inference methods have a resampling option.

### Bootstrap particle filter (BPF)

```bash
tpplc -m smc-bpf
```

This is the classical SMC schema.
Except in special cases, the alive particle filter (APF) should be preferred as the BPF can suffer from [path degeneration](../Explanation/path-degeneration.md).

This inference is affected by the resample placement method.

### Alive particle filter (APF)

```bash
tpplc -m smc-apf
```

This is the more advanced SMC schema.
It avoids [path degeneration](../Explanation/path-degeneration.md) by keeping a population of particles alive.

[Reference: Kudlicka et al. 2020](https://proceedings.mlr.press/v115/kudlicka20a.html).

### Likelihood resampling

```bash
tpplc -m smc-bpf --resample likelihood
```

resamples the particles at every `observe`, `weight`, and `logWeight` statement.

### Aligned resampling

```bash
tpplc -m smc-bpf --resample align
```

resamples the particles after `observe`, `weight`, and `logWeight` statements that are [aligned](../Explanation/alignment.md).

### Manual resampling

```bash
tpplc -m smc-bpf --resample manual
```

resamples only at the `resample` keyword.  This is the default behavior.

## Markov-chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) Methods

TreePPL supports a range of MCMC methods:

  - lightweight MCMC
  - aligned lightweight MCMC (with different options for CPS)
  - naive and trace MCMC
  - particle MCMC--particle-independent Metropolis-Hastings

### Lightweight MCMC

This is not as efficient as its aligned version and should be used only for testing.

### Aligned lightweight MCMC

```bash
tpplc -m mcmc-lightweight --align
```

This is the Markov-chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) schema that should be used in most cases.
Moves are proposed by resampling one `assume` statement at random.
Draws that are [aligned](../Explanation/alignment.md) together with some unaligned draws are reused to save computational effort.
It has an option of whether to do a continuation-passing style transformation in order to avoid recomputation of the likelihood:

```bash
tpplc -m mcmc-lightweight --cps partial
```

is the default, which should be the most performant. For details, see [Lunden et al. 2024](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-031-57267-8_12).

One can also use a full CPS transformation

```bash
tpplc -m mcmc-lightweight --cps full
```

which is the traditional algorithm, or to turn it off completely

```bash
tpplc -m mcmc-lightweight --cps none
```

which may also be beneficial in certain scenarios, where the CPS overhead is not a good trade-off vs recomputing the likelihood.

### Naive and trace MCMC

The new proposed sample is a complete rerun of the entire simulation.
Those are pedagogical methods that should not be used for real problems.

### Particle MCMC--Particle independent Metropolis-Hastings (PMCMC-PIMH)

This is perhaps the simplest version of an SMC-within-MCMC approach, where each proposal in the MCMC is a full set of samples (particles) generated by SMC.

[Reference: Paige 2014](https://proceedings.mlr.press/v32/paige14.pdf).
